The single greatest skill you can
develop is the ability to stay in a
great mood in the absence of things to
be in a great mood about. I've had some
of the hardest days of my life this
year. Maybe you feel the same way. And
so in this video, I want to share a
four-part framework that has helped me
move forward even when life feels hard.
So number one, learn the greatest skill.
If you can be in a bad mood for no
reason, then you might as well be in a
good mood for no reason, too. One of the
things that's been helpful for me is
just actually recognizing the math of
hard days. Think about you having a 100
days, right? Let's just say that you,
you know, last 100 days of your life.
Well, the top 10% of those days, you're
going to have 10 days that are smiley
face days. And then you might have, you
know, kind of the middle 80 that's going
to be kind of neutral days, right? And
then you're going to have your bottom
10% days. Now, this is just normal
because of a standard distribution of
how days work. When I think back on, you
know, my days sometimes, I'm like, you
know what, maybe today is just a bottom
10% day. And if I didn't have this
bottom 10% day, then I wouldn't be able
to recognize the difference between
these days and the top 10% days. And so
in order for me to want to have top 10%
days, I by definition must also have
bottom 10% days. I think the most
important skill that you can have is
being able to reframe reality. And I say
this because I had a very good friend of
mine this year say something to me and
it was it was really powerful and it's
been top of mind since he said it. He
said, "You're Alex Hermoszi. you can get
away with whatever you want as long as
you frame it right. And I really thought
a lot about that and I've I've brought
that perspective to a lot of the
conversations, a lot of difficult things
I've had to go through this year. It
reminds me of a quote from Victor Frankl
who wrote the book a man's search for
meaning which he wrote while he was in
the concentration camps during the
Holocaust and he survived or he wrote
about that time period. And one of the
things that he said is he who has a why
to live for can bear almost any how. If
you think about that, the why is the
reframe for dealing with the how. How
can I frame this this difficult thing,
this thing that I'm about to go through
or that I just went through. How can I
reframe that? In what world would this
be an amazing thing? In what world were
when I tell this story 40, 50 years from
now, would I be like, this is a pivot
point for me. I had to have this origin
story in order to get to where I wanted
to go or to become the type of person I
wanted to be. These have been some of
the mental reframes that I've used on
some of the harder days that I've had.
So, this year I had a gigantic bill come
out of nowhere. It was a a multi-8
figure bill that was required to get
paid in 72 hours in cash. I, you know,
thankfully had that available to me, but
I had obviously different plans for that
money than dealing with this gigantic
bill that I had to all of a sudden pay
within 72 hours. basically the moment
between when I got the news to me paying
it to then kind of reflecting back
because it almost felt so fast or was
like I've got you know I've got all
these plans and then boom this happens
and then 72 hours later it's like wow
okay what am I going to do what am I
going to do kind of moving forward from
this and there's this great quote by
Marcus Aurelius which is what are you so
afraid of losing when nothing in this
world belongs to you I really thought a
lot about that which it's like I can't
take it with me in the end and so being
sad about losing ing something that was
never really mine anyways. Like I'm
going to have to push all my chips to
the middle of the board when when the
game's over. I'm going to have to cash
my chips and somebody else, you know,
other people are going to distribute my
chips when I die. And so it's like I'm
really just a steward of these chips.
I'm just renting these chips for a
minute to be upset and to ruin the one
thing that I'm only that is that is
finite, which is the present moment for
something that actually doesn't affect
how I live. So this is the second piece.
This is actually kind of a utilitarian
perspective. It really helped me by
losing that money. I asked myself, what
does this change about what I do? What
does this change about my life? It
doesn't change the food I eat. It
doesn't change where I live. It doesn't
change where I work. It doesn't change
what I do. It actually changes nothing.
All that changed was just like in my
mind I had an expectation of the future
that changed. That was it. And I said,
"Okay, because of this thing that exists
in my mind, I am choosing to punish
myself for not having seen this or not
paying attention or whatever number of
reasons I could blame myself for." But
at the end of the day, I was like,
"Okay, so you just get to pick how long
you want to beat yourself up for." And I
was like, huh, well, what am I so afraid
of losing if nothing in this world
belongs to me? Nothing. This wasn't mine
to begin with. And so that really kind
of helped me quell that kind of negative
thought pattern pretty quickly. So
there's to put a little comedic spin on
this. Mark Twain, which has some of the
best quotes like ever, by the way. He
said, "I've lived through uh many
terrible tragedies, um, only some of
them actually happened." And so it's
like, you know, most of us suffer almost
exclusively in our minds. I found it
helpful when I'm in a bad season like I
am right now. To be fair, I don't try to
like put big labels on things, but I
guess I'm just giving myself a little
bit of grace, but to just focus on
having a good day. And so, it's like,
okay, even though this is a bad season,
I'm going to have a good day in a bad
season. It's kind of like a bite-size
victory. And if I start stringing enough
of those good days in a row, I'm going
to turn a bad season back into a good
season. And it makes it feel a little
less bad because I feel like I'm making
progress. I heard this bit by Bill Aman,
who was like getting sued. He was going
through divorce. He just lost $4 billion
in Parishing Square for his capital. So
he was like honestly all of this
happened at the same time and he
realized all these projects for these
big massive things which is a lot of
kind of the stuff I'm dealing with right
now. They're not like okay I had a bad
day. They're like things that just la
they last and they prolong, right? And
he said you just got a little bit done
every day. That's it. He's like you just
got to make a little bit of progress
every day. And kind of like compounding
and investing it's like you don't really
you don't see it in in a day or two or a
week or two. It's like but you look at
back at 30 days you're like all right I
moved the ball a little bit. you look
back on 90, you're like, "All right, I
made some progress." And it's just like
if you have big goals, you're also going
to have equally large obstacles. And so,
you can't assume that, oh, my big goals
are going to take many, many years, and
that the obstacles that I have to
maneuver around are going to happen
overnight. Sometimes obstacles you have
to maneuver around might take a year or
multiple years to get around. And so,
you have to be able to manage your
headsp space and basically keep your
internal combustion engine going during
those harder times. And so, it's kind of
like a monkey swinging from good good
moment to good moment. Because even
going from bad season to good day, you
can even have bad day and good moment.
So I was trying to thought, okay, today
was a shitty day. Fine. What good
moments did I have? And by focusing on
the moments when I look back on my life,
you forget most of your life. Like if
we're being real, like you can't recall
most of your life. Most people can't
even recall what they ate like three
days ago. But you can have the moments.
And so the moments when I think about at
the end of my life looking backwards,
those are the only things I'm really
going to remember. I just want to make
sure that I take those down. Feels like
a bad season now. I can try and forget
most of the bad stuff and just try and
remember the good moments. In
retrospect, I can have rose rosecolored
glasses when it comes to this this
season. Well, how do you have a good
day? And I think this is different for
everyone, but I'll tell you what my
little formula is for for having a good
day. Good day formula. For me, there's
only three things. Number one is eat
with people I like. Simple enough.
Number two, lift with people I
like. And the third is write
something. If I do those three things, I
had a pretty good day. Like I look back
and I'm like, I earned my shower today.
I feel good about this. Maybe for you,
your three things are going to be
entirely different. Now, I'll give you a
little wrinkle on something that's been
really valuable for me, like absurdly
valuable. The thing that I noticed that
made these two things significantly
better or really all three of these
things is not being in a rush. If I have
to lift and it's like I only have 60
minutes to lift, I don't like that. Some
people are fine with it. Some people are
like, well, this is how my life has to
be. That's fine. I have come to a point
in my life where I was like, I have a
lot of money and I have the ability to
not work anymore and there are not a
huge amount of things that bring me big
joy. If these are the few things that
bring me joy, which is eating without a
clock with people I like, lifting
without a clock uh with people I like,
and writing something for as long as I
feel like, then I should organize my day
so that I don't have as like many many
hard stops so that if I want to lift in
the morning, I don't have something at
9. And if I do have something at 9, it's
something that's movable, right? Like if
I have to, you know, make this video, it
could be at 9:00, but the team knows if
I show up at 9:30 or 9:45 cuz I lifted
longer, that's fine. It's all good. It
has taken my good day formula and made
it like my super good day formula. And
so sometimes it's like what are the tiny
nuances that actually make something
different between good and great. I
thought about like the days that I had
these three things happen and then I had
better days that has those three things
happen. I was like what was the
difference? And the difference was that
I didn't have to be somewhere else.
And in trying not to have a rush, it
means I have to give something else up.
Then the question is, is the thing that
I'm giving up worth having a better day.
For me, I was like, yes, I'm willing to
give up some money or some upside in
order to have consistently better days.
And that's a trade I'm willing to make
at this point in my career. So, let's
move on to number two, which is redefine
pain. If you want to achieve a goal,
you're either going to have to accept
boredom or pain. And the bigger the
goal, the more of both you'll get. When
I started my gym, I actually lived with
six other people in one house. This is
like off of beach town. Think like sand
everywhere, people everywhere, dirty
dishes everywhere, not enough room in
refrigerator for food, cooking was an
absolute mess. Almost all of them had
dogs. So, a couple had two dogs, another
couple had one dog, another guy had a
dog. Four different dogs in the house.
And they were like all marking
territory. It was horrendous. And I was
splitting one room with a guy with a
bed, like two beds. My bed was on the
floor, his bed was, you know, elevated
because he uh he could afford that at
the time. And I would sleep with a fan
on my face. I couldn't hear anything.
That was my secret. Like is the fan like
you there's like the wind over like
that's all I could hear. The thing is is
like I was doing that when I was making
like 20 grand a month take home. There's
always trade-offs. And the trade-off for
me of living in that condition was that
I could invest in the dream and build
the business that I had at the time.
Now, I could look back because I ended
up losing everything, you know, a few
years later. You know, you get this
negative cycle of like all of that
suffering was for nothing, but it wasn't
for nothing because I learned all these
skills along the way. You also can't
operate from the perspective of like I
might lose it all in the future, which
means everything I do today is not worth
anything because like you're going to
lose 100% of everything the moment you
die. So, trying to say that you might
lose something in the future is a reason
not to do something is ridiculous.
You're going to lose everything at some
point. You cannot wish for both strong
character and an easy life because the
price of one is the other. When I think
about pain, I think about what thing am
I paying for right now and is that thing
something that I want and if so, it
reframes the pain as the price of the
thing that I want. This is super
interesting is they've done research on
this where they have somebody who like
accepts like shocks. They can like opt
out at any point. If you have the same
man who's getting shocked and then you
tell that man in the other room every
shock he takes his family doesn't have
to take his threshold of pain like
quadruples. This may seem like some
quote mindset whatever. But the thing is
is like the bigger your goals the more
pain you're going to endure whether you
want to or not. It's the price. And if
you can endure four times more pain than
someone else I don't actually think that
it feels four times more painful. I
think it feels the same level of pain,
but you have this padding that makes it
feel worth it. Give a man a purpose and
the ability to achieve it and he will
crawl over broken glass with a smile.
That broken glass, like how can you have
a smile during the pain? It's because of
what the pain itself represents. Now,
I'm going to get get a little bit into
behavior because I think it's it's
valuable. I talk a lot about reward and
punishment, but those are kind of more
colloquial terms. When it comes down to
behavior, it's actually reinforcers. A
reinforcer can be negative, meaning it
can be something that's aversive. So,
for example, if I know that every time I
hit my hand with a hammer, I'm going to
grow muscle. Hitting my hand with a
hammer or taking the shock for my family
means something positive, which is that
I'm protecting my family, I'm helping my
country, I'm I'm doing something that I
deem meaningful. The pain itself can
become a positive reinforcer because you
know you're making progress towards the
thing you want. Now, you might think of
that and be like, well, I don't want to
have the pain. I mean the thing is is
that when you're going through it, if
you have this frame, it isn't as
painful. In a lot of ways, it's like we
are our own sculpture that we are
working on. And as we chisel away, we
also get to reveal the type of person
that we want to become, the traits and
the behaviors and the belief sets that
go with the man or woman that we're
trying to trying to grow into. And so I
wrote this story, I want to say a year
ago, maybe two years ago that related to
this that I just want to share with you.
So imagine you're talking to the creator
of the universe about the person that
you want to become. And so you say, you
know, I want to be courageous. And the
creator replies, then I will give you
monsters that terrify you. That way you
can conquer them. And you say, well, I
want to be patient. And the creator
replies, then I will make you work
harder and longer and nothing will come
easy to you. That way you can learn to
wait. Or like, okay, well, I want to be
wise. And so the creator says, then I
will give you failures that will crush
your spirit. That way you can learn the
value of judgment. Then you say, that
sounds like a hard life. Can you give me
a good life? And the critter replies,
"Just like we measure the quality of a
blacksmith by the strength of his steel,
I measure you by what you are at the
end, not the fire and the hammer that it
took to make you." A good life isn't an
easy life. A good life makes you into a
good person. And that, my child, is a
hard life. It's about who we become
doing the work more than the outcome
from the work itself. And I love this,
and this is a reframing of Proverbs, but
the works on you more than you work on
it. Like in all labor, there is profit.
Meaning we always benefit from work.
Even if the thing that we work on gets
destroyed, even if you went bankrupt,
even if you know that relationship
didn't work out, even if that
partnership falls apart, the work you
did is eternal because it changes you.
For those of you who don't know who are
new to my channel, I lost everything
five years into my entrepreneurial
journey and then I made a little bit
more and then I lost it all again. But
the thing is is that I had this idea
that, oh, I have to start from scratch
again. But that's not true because you
can only start from scratch once. Every
time after that, you start with an
experience. A man with an experience is
never at the mercy of a man with an
opinion. And you transition from the
second to the first, the moment you
begin working because you're no longer
somebody who has an opinion. And as soon
as you know what that truth is, because
you've been there and you've actually
done it and you have the scars to show
for it, then their opinions matter
significantly less. I'll give you a
different reframe that I've had for
redefining pain as it relates to other
people, which is you can summarize just
about every hateful comment on the
internet into one thing. He lives his
life in a way that I would not
prefer. That's it. Everything is he
lives his life in a way that I would not
prefer. To which I respond, yes, I do
live my life in a way that most people
would not prefer and they live their
life in a way that I would not prefer.
And that is why it is their life and
they can live their life the way that
they want to live their life, the way
they prefer it. And I will live my life
the way that I prefer it. They cast
these stones at you as though it
matters. My dad told me this when he was
going through his divorce. He said he
went through this like divorce
conference and the the speaker on stage
said to somebody in the audience, he
said, "Hey, here's a ball." and he threw
it to him and he said, "Okay, throw it
back to me." So he caught the ball. He
said, "Now I want you to imagine that
this ball is a steaming hot pile of and
he threw it to the person again and the
person caught it." He said, "Why would
you catch it?" And so the lesson of that
is just because someone hurls at you
doesn't mean you need to catch it. You
don't need to choose to participate. And
I thought that was a really interesting
frame. People can hurl whatever they
want. It doesn't mean that they have
justified a response or that you need to
accept it. and that little reframe of,
oh, I live my life in a way that other
people would not prefer. Well, that
makes sense. I'm not trying to live the
same life as them, so of course. And
then they say, he made trade-offs that I
would not make. And I say, of course, of
course I did. Why is this why is this
somehow an insult? When I was making
those trades in the earlier days, I
didn't know when I would be successful
or if I would be successful. The only
thing that I knew for sure was that I
wasn't going to
stop. And that was it. I know I can just
not stop. and that's something that I
can commit to and that's controllable. I
think a lot of the big gift of hardship
is that it doesn't define you, it
reveals you. The benefit is that you get
to see who you really are and you make
that decision yourself every day. I have
this perspective on loyalty which is
that like you cannot say that you are
loyal until your loyalty is tested. You
cannot say you're patient until your
patience is tested. Otherwise, it's an
opinion, not an experience. You can't
say that you handle hardship and that
you're emotionally resilient until
you've had something to be emotionally
resilient about. The gift of the hard
time is to give you proof of who you are
so that the rest of your life you get to
know that you did that and you get to
tell that story and relive that story to
yourself for the rest of your life. And
to me that gives the hardship memory
dividends that pay forever until the day
you die. I'll tell you a story. So I
went to a school in the SEC and you know
some of the SEC schools are renowned for
hazing and and and aggressive stuff and
so I I was you know going to join a
fraternity and you know obviously they
uh they you know build up how hard you
know pledging is going to be and all
this stuff right and I called my dad to
to talk about it and he just said
remember there is nothing that they can
do to you that is harder than what
you've already been through and it was a
great reframe because I remember the
times you know like when you know things
would be quote hard during that that
season of pledging and I would just
think about the things that I had
already survived, the things that I had
already been through at that point and
it made what they believed to be
suffering appear childish. I was like,
"This is cute." But for the people who
were present in the moment rather than
being able to relive through their
memory dividends, using it as a shield
for my emotional affect during the
moment was like, "All right, I have
these eight weeks where I have to stand
here before you apparently give me a
stamp of approval. Fine, then I will do
that. I live my life in ways that you
would not
prefer." And that carried me a pretty
long way. And so, let's say that you've
used these tools to redefine pain,
right? And you've realized that you are
the outcome. The work you do is the only
thing you control. And the person you
become becomes the evidence of the work
that you voluntarily subjected yourself
to. And not only does that pain or that
difficulty or discomfort make you
better, it's also what separates you
from everyone else. And whenever I do go
through those moments, I do have these
slight like crook of the smile, you
know, I mean, crook of my lip that goes
up because I'm reminded that everything
that I'm willing to tolerate and deal
with is what everyone else who wants to
do the same thing will be incapable of
doing. If it's hard for me, it will be
just as hard for somebody else. And I
think for some reason that gives me some
sadistic pleasure that I will be able to
to keep moving forward. That's kind of a
perfect transition to number three,
right? Which is endure what others
won't. All of this becomes your
competitive advantage. And that
competitive advantage compounds. The
more memories you have of hardship that
you've been through, the more it stacks,
the more it becomes a trait, the more it
becomes in ingrained in your behavior.
And the more it takes to shake you
because you're like, well, this is my
baseline. This isn't even close. It's
not even it doesn't even register on my
scale of something that's an
inconvenience. We've all met that person
where like if a if a if a call gets
moved or a you know a dinner plate is
late it's like it's like a nuclear bomb
went off, right? It's like well what's
the opposite of that? Like what's the
person who like it doesn't matter if a
nuclear bomb went off but all you see is
a straight line completely undisturbed
by the things that are going around them
because you can beat 99% of people
without being smarter or luckier but by
being willing to endure pain and
uncertainty for longer. It's hard for
you. It's hard for everyone else. And
most people avoid hard things, which is
why you can beat most people by just
trying and continuing to try. And the
main thing is is that I think most
people don't even know what trying feels
like. Ila and I have been going through
this season, so it hasn't just been me.
And she had a mentor say something to
her that she told me and I really liked
it. She said, "Hey, you know, we had
this difficult situation and you know,
we're kind of relegated to, you know,
this option or this option and neither
of the options were particularly good."
And she said to Leila, "Are you settling
or are you moving mountains?" And I
really like that because like whenever
I'm looking at these choices that I like
sometimes feel bad, I'm like, "Is there
another option that I could see if I
move the mountain?" And that has just
dramatically increased the willingness
to work, to really try. I keep thinking
to myself like, okay, well, if I was
going to get killed or Ila was going to
get killed or people I cared about were
going to die if I didn't come up with
another solution or if I made the thing
that I wanted to have happen happen,
what other things would I do? And
usually it's a lot more. whatever way
you have to unlock that level of trying,
that level of effort. Like most things
are hilariously easy to do, it's just
more easy. It's easier to just do
nothing. Most people do nothing and get
nothing and are dissatisfied because
their expectations that they would get
something for that nothing of work.
What's crazy is that the highest levels
of effort are so rare amongst people
that you can unlock most things in the
universe with it by just really trying
like your life depends on it. because it
does. Most of the time we know what
we're supposed to do. We just have
trouble doing it. Like, you know what
you need to do to get a six-pack. You
know what you need to do to build
muscle. People already know this. Like,
you don't need to know anything about
training to do that. You just stop
eating crap. Maybe eat some protein and
add more weight to the bar over an
extended period of time. That's it.
That's all it is. You know that already.
And yet, you haven't begun because you
haven't really tried. Like, it's
hilarious to me. It's it's it's
apparently rarer to have a six-pack
above age like 30 than it is to be a
millionaire. Like, think about how crazy
that is. And don't cite the sources. I
heard that and I believe it. Whatever.
9% of Americans have a a net worth over
a million dollars. Surprising, right? 9%
of Americans certainly don't have a
six-pack. It's rarer to have a six-pack
than be a millionaire. I just I think
about that. It's like we know what to
do. It's just we're not willing to
endure what it's required to get it. And
we're not willing to reframe that pain
as the price of the thing we want and to
give our pain meaning. Fortunately or
unfortunately, you know, humans, we live
in a competitive environment. We seek
status because of, you know,
evolutionary backdrops. And so, how do
you beat other people? And I want to be
clear, I don't really think you need to
beat anybody, right? If you just beat
you every day, you'll beat everybody by
default. And I think that you'll get to
the end of the race and realize no one
else is really racing anyways. But the
main main is that you need to get out of
I had actually conversation with
somebody on my team this morning. They
were saying they want to do this
training um for the department that
they're in and they wanted to talk about
running on clean energy versus dark
energy. And I was like, what does that
mean? He's like, you know, clean energy
is like you're going towards something.
Dark energy is like you're running away
from something. And I thought, I think
that's a really good and noble idea. The
problem is no one's going to know what
to do with that. Because what it really
meant was if you guys do your jobs using
quote clean energy or knowing when to
use quote dark energy, you will be more
effective. Okay, fine. Now we have
conditions for a behavior. I asked him,
I said, "If you want this trainer to be
significantly more effective, I need you
to do two things. Number one is define
what having clean energy looks like. How
do I observe someone who has clean
energy? What do they do? Do they talk
differently? Do they ask different
questions? They have different cadence."
And to the same degree, you know, having
dark energy doesn't mean you ask more
times. You you push back more often.
Let's define this in terms of behavior.
And then what we'll probably find is
that there's no such thing as clean or
dark energy. There's only behaviors that
under certain conditions increase the
likelihood of a positive outcome or a
desired outcome. Okay? In these
conditions do this and in other
conditions do that. And so then we can
get away from these amorphous terms. And
the reason I'm bringing this up is that
we have to define everything in terms of
the actions that you're going to take.
Let me give you a visual of the
difference between sadness and anxiety.
I'm going to draw them and you tell me
which one is anxiety and which one is
sadness. Which one's anxiety? Which
one's sadness? Anxiety. Sadness. Sadness
comes from a perceived lack of options,
which is why it feels like hopelessness.
Anxiety comes from many options but a
lack of priorities which is why it feels
like paralysis. So looking everywhere
but moving nowhere. And so you solve
sadness with knowledge and anxiety with
a decision. The goal from here is to see
the path that's available to you. And
you have to do that by learning. Once
you have a path, if you have too many
paths, then you have to start cutting
paths off. So you can say this is where
I'm going and then I have no more
anxiety around this. So if you don't
know what to do, the answer is to learn.
If you know what to do, the answer is to
do it. And if you're already doing it,
the answer is to never stop. What I will
reinforce here is that none of those
three actions that I just defined have
anything to do about how you feel today
or in this moment. I want to be very
clear. People think that I'm this uh
unemotional or zero affect person.
That's not true at all. Of course I feel
things. The difference is so
what? Like I can feel terrible and still
do the actions that increase the
likelihood of success. It's not trying
to negate the fact that you have
emotions or that you have bad feelings.
It's about continuing on the path one
step in front of the other despite that.
And I think that the more you learn that
your actions do not need to be equated
to how you feel, the more these feelings
can just be in the backdrop and
ultimately they make you resilient. So
let me show you what resilience looks
like. Which one's
resilient? This one. Why? because you
return to baseline behavior
faster. Now, toughness is a different
thing which is how much does it take
before I have this
decrease? And then there's a third
vector which I'll find the word for it.
But when you do have the decrease, how
low do you
go? To me, the ideal scene
is
that. And the thing is is that all of
these things are happening throughout
this whole period and the other people
in your lives are doing this, right? Or
they're just doing low and they just
never recover, which we've all met those
people. If you want to become resilient,
what are the actions that you take? You
say, "Okay, this occurred. How long will
it take me for my behavior to return to
baseline?" And if my behavior never
changes, did it bother me to begin with?
And maybe it might have bothered you,
but it didn't matter because it never
changed your behavior. One of the things
that will set you apart is the ability
to move forward despite how you feel.
This is, you know, Leila's classic uh
her most known quote, which is uh your
mood, follow the plan. And I would say
like a lot of you guys don't know Ila
that well. Ila is one of the most
mentally resilient people that I've ever
met. And she pulled herself out of a
deeper hole than I ever did. She started
from a poorer family. She had a worse
home situation. She had a worse personal
she had, you know, she got arrested six
times before she was 18 or 19. Like she
she has worked on her more than any
person that I know. Not to say that it's
not more than any person in existence,
of course. I have no idea. But of the
people that I've met, she has done the
most active work and I have learned a
lot from her. Let's imagine we're going
through this, right? So, you've learned
the greatest skill of reframing. You've
redefined pain in a new way so it
actually could be progress for you.
we're willing to endure and take actions
um that other people aren't willing to
take so that we realize that they were
never in the race to begin with and it's
all about us anyways. And so what's the
fourth thing is that you zoom out and
you keep going. You will die months
later no one will care. And so why care
about what they think so much when they
care so little about what you do? Like
take the risk, right? Shake off the
losses. shake them off because in the
end you live for the story only you can
tell to the only person who was there
with you the entire time which is you
might as well make it epic because
you're the you're literally the story
writer and the story listener the story
consumer were born alone and we die
alone even if other people captured your
entire life they still don't know what
was going on in your head they don't
know your intentions they don't know
what you were thinking through at every
given moment only you do that being able
to over time in my opinion and be the
judge, jury, executioner of your own
faith and your own judgment is one of
the most valuable things you can do
because you're the only person who can
say good job. You might win in some
circumstances and not have tried. To me,
that's a loss because you know you could
have let you could have put more in. You
didn't empty the tank, right? You left
some on the field. The other extreme, if
you followed a logical thought path and
you did, you moved mountains to try and
accomplish something and if you actually
had exhausted every possible path that
you could think of truly beyond costs
that were no that were not worth the
price of whatever you were trying to
get. You exhausted all the the paths
that were worth it and you don't get it.
Other people may have said that you
lost, but you know there's nothing else
you could have done and so you can still
say good job because of the effort that
you chose to put in. I have a few
frameworks for zooming out that I think
may help you. So, one of my favorites is
the frame of the veteran, which is,
okay, something bad happens. If it
happened a thousand times in a row, how
would I feel about it the thousandth
time? Well, I probably be like, well,
that's just how things are. And it would
no longer bother me. And so, if it no
longer bothers me then, then it means
it's a choice for it to bother me now,
so I might as well choose not to have it
bother me today. The second frame is
cosmic relevance, which is basically
zooming out so far that you realize that
we're just a tiny little marble in a
galaxy. And you know, humans have only
been alive for this tiny sliver of time
throughout the billions of years. And
the likelihood that your boss saying
something mean or some person on the
internet saying something snide or
someone making a video just hating on
you or some parents not approving of
your current life path or somebody
trying to discredit you for not being
legit.
does not matter. And to the third one,
this is a really good one for gratitude
is all considered the grandfather frame,
which is
basically you zoom all the way to the to
the future. You're 85 years old. So,
you're an old man, right? You've been,
you know, you're in pain. Everything
hurts. You don't have the energy you
used to. You're slashing over and
you're, you know, you're counting down
your days. And then you imagine yourself
waking up in whatever age body you have
right now. and you turn to your, you
know, your right or your left and you
see your wife and you're like, "Man,
she's so young. I couldn't can't believe
she's so young right now." You look out
the window and you're like, "Oh man,
this is before they develop this whole
area and we had all these highrises."
And then you like you get out of bed and
you're like, "Oh man, like I'm not in
pain, you know?" And you wake up and
you're like, you know, I don't feel like
foggy. I feel like my memory is sharp. I
I'm like I'm acute. I know what I'm
going to do. And you're like, "Wow, this
is amazing." And the thing is is like
nothing good has even happened yet
because life just gets so much harder as
you get older. You can imagine how like
gratitude comes from imagining a
terrible thing and then removing that
thing that was terrible. That is
gratitude. Like how do you
operationalize gratitude? Imagine
something terrible and then remember
that that terrible thing has not
occurred. That's gratitude. People are
like, "Oh man, I'm so grateful for my
health." How do you get grateful for
your health? Imagine that you have
cancer and you're about to die and then
realize that you don't have cancer. And
then you're like, "Wow, I'm grateful
that I don't have cancer." But you have
to put that thing in there. You have to
imagine that terrible thing. You have to
go all the way there. I'll tell you
something that happened recently. Leila
had a doctor's appointment for
something. And I was I was corresponding
with our EAS and I said, you know, how's
everything going? And my EA responded,
she has cancer. And I was
like, okay, got it. This is reality now.
Okay. like and then I and obviously I'm
texting back like you know what kind
what's going on like do I need to be
there you know what's up and then she
was like oh my god I'm so sorry I meant
the person who was the front desk the
reason they messed something up was
because she had cancer not Ila and I was
like got it and so what ended up
happening um was that Ila ended up
having you know something that she was
dealing with and they figured out what
it was so it wasn't good news but what
had framed that bad news was that she
was potentially on her deathbed. For me,
I was just incredibly grateful that she
didn't have cancer. And so, it just gave
me this really wonderful reframe by
accident of like it could be worse.
You're not dead. The fact that you were
alive is living proof that you can
endure it. And the day that something
kills you, you won't have to anymore.
Your life every day exists as evidence
that you can handle everything that has
come your way. And I think that if
you've ever had any need for evidence,
let that be the greatest evidence of
all. A while back, there was a guy who
had like broke up with his girlfriend.
His grandfather died and like I think
somebody else in his family had two
deaths in a breakup. And he's like, "How
do I keep going?" And I was like, "You
already are keeping going. Like you
don't need any answer from me. Every day
you are living proof from the fact that
you have endured." When I need advice,
I'll be real with you. like everybody
here, you know, everybody who's
listening to this like being vulnerable,
right? You know, with other people is
tough and and there's I think there's
some reasonable reasons why. One is like
you don't want to be a burden to
somebody else. Number two is like you
don't want to be that person who always
just like emotionally dumps on others.
Like that's not good. And at the same
time, like if you're going through hard
stuff, especially if it's related to
other people, people don't forget the
hard thing that you're dealing with with
somebody else. And so you might end up
getting out of that and forgiving the
person or whatever, but the person you
tell will always remember it. Then
sometimes it's difficult. Like let's say
you have an issue with your your spouse.
Who do you tell, right? Do you want to
tell your homies? I don't know. That
feels a little bit of a breach of of
kind of like the the marriage, you know,
the marital covenant. You're not going
to tell your employees, right? You don't
want to tell your family because then
they're going to start they're going to
see your your your your husband or your
your wife differently. So, who do you
tell? Because you could tell a
therapist, but maybe you don't want to
do therapy because you don't like it.
Who do you tell? Who do you get advice
from? And so, I'll give you who I think
about this. And you know, unfortunately,
the more status you acrew, the more
valuable dirt on you is. If you're going
through a hard time, the more people
will want to gain that information to
use it to their own advantage. And so,
it actually makes it even lonelier. I
use Solomon frame as my way of getting
the therapy that I think is helpful. The
reason I call it Solomon is because
there's a thing called the Solomon
paradox, which is there's a human
tendency to be better at offering wise
advice to others than it is to apply
that same wisdom to our own situation,
our own lives. They call it the Solomon
paradox because Solomon was this big
wise guy, but he actually his life was a
bit of a mess. It's almost like Merlin
could see the future for everyone except
for himself. The way that I use this is
I think I want to imagine talking to my
85-year-old incredibly wise self or at
least wiser than I am now. And I ask him
what he thinks I should do. And what's
weird is it takes you out of your
current frame and puts you in this other
frame and you become more objective
about your current situation. I actually
had a a conversation with a business
owner who was out here in Vegas at one
of our advisory practice events and she
said, "I've got all these businesses,
not really sure what I should do, blah
blah blah." And she happened to have
like a business academy as one of her
businesses. And I said, "Let me reverse
the tables on you." I said, "Let me
pretend to be a business owner and I'm
going to say back to you everything you
just said. What do you think you should
do?" She was like, "Well, yeah. I mean,
it's obvious when you think about it
like that." And I'm like, "Right, it's
obvious." It's only difficult for us
because our judgment is clouded by our
emotions because we have emotional
context. We have emotional ties to the
people or the situations or the
investments. You can be like more
logical decision-making is a good thing.
By pulling out and thinking about your
85-year-old self, you're able to be less
emotional about the current situation
without sacrificing any kind of
confidentiality because it's still you
talking to you. You don't have to waste
any time giving context or and let's be
real, if you know how to persuade
people, you can jade your data that you
give to somebody else so that they give
you the answer that you want rather than
giving them the whole picture which you
might be embarrassed to share. In my
opinion, this framework of having these
conversations and to be fair, I don't do
it all the time. I do it when I need it.
If I'm like, man, I got to work through
this. I just have this little chat that
I open up and I just start writing
through like a a DM to me in the future.
And I literally just sp, you know, enter
space. Enter space. Um, that includes me
mocking my younger self, uh, which I do
frequently, or at least my 85-year-old
self does. In my opinion, it has been
more helpful than therapy because you
have all the context. This has helped me
make significantly better choices when I
feel like I have emotionality that could
be affecting me. to do a call back to
the clean and dark energy thing. There
is a lot of
judgment online about how people choose
to work, what fuels them, which
fundamentally is it reward or
punishment. Are they are they going away
from an aversive stimulus towards, you
know, a positive
one? The answer in my opinion doesn't
matter. And what I mean by that is I
think the first rule of all
entrepreneurship is use what you have
because that's not going to change
today. You have what you have. Those are
the only resources you have available to
you. You must become more resourceful.
And that means that if you have shame
and people tell you shame is
bad, in what world could shame be good?
If the shame you have creates this
amazingly positive thing in your life,
was it bad? If your dad not hugging you
enough created the catalyst for you to
go to the gym and live 20 years longer
because you work out regularly, was it
bad? Do we need to label it at all? All
we know is that it happened and so what?
There are these actions that increase
the likelihood that you get what you
want. Whether you do them because you
had some negative thing or because
you're going towards some positive
thing, I think for the vast majority of
people is narrative. They only they
create the story. If I said, "Hey, why
did you do this thing? We are trained to
give an answer, but that answer may have
zero grounding in the truth. Not because
you lie, but because you have no idea.
Because most people don't know why they
do what they do. They just do it and
then they ascribe a reason afterwards.
We know that it's mostly BS and you're
not going to have a double blind
controlled placebo study on your life to
be able to determine what the true root
cause of. Was this the dependent
variable? If you're not going to be able
to do that anyways, who cares? Use
whatever you've got to get whatever you
want. give you a behavioral, you know,
thing for this is like you might be
going through something difficult or a
hard season or a bad day or a bad
moment, right? And I've heard this
saying and it drives me absolutely
bananas, which is that bad things come
in threes. Anyone heard this before,
right? I so wholeheartedly disagree, but
I will explain why I believe that saying
is a saying. Bad things do not come in
threes. Bad things occur. People do not
know how to cope. They allow one bad
thing to snowball into more bad things.
And bad stuff sucks. And the only thing
worse than letting one bad thing be a
bad thing is to let one bad thing ruin
many good things. If you think about a
bad thing as a cancer, it's like, well,
we want to isolate that cancer as fast
as possible and not let that cancer of
you losing your job affect your marriage
and then let you affecting your marriage
affect how you're, you know, a parent
and let you know how you're a parent
affect how you were going to pursue this
new endeavor. People just basically give
themselves an excuse for misbehaving. I
had a bad day. Therefore, I now have a
legitimate excuse for being a bad
husband or not being nice to my wife.
They use it as an excuse to not exercise
self-control. And that is when things
snowball. This is why resilience is so
important. Can something bad happen and
I recover before I talk to somebody
else. When things get bad, it looks like
this. Something bad happens, something
else bad happens, something else bad
happens. And it keeps going down until
eventually everyone in your life that is
good has removed themselves. and then
you slowly recover or you don't recover
at all. And you've seen these people, he
lost his job, he gained weight, and man,
he's just never been the same. Pull your
head out of your ass. There's this
Buddhist parable. I've been um actually
looking a lot more into Buddhism lately,
weirdly enough. The Buddha asked one of
his students, "If a person is struck by
an arrow, is it painful?" The student
nods yes. Then the Buddha asks, "If a
person is struck by a second arrow, is
that even more painful?" The student
nods again. He's like, "Yeah, it is."
Then Buddha explains in life we cannot
always control the first arrow. However,
the second arrow is our reaction to the
first. The second arrow is optional. A
lot of suffering that we incur like Mark
Twain right said earlier like is
optional. It mostly happens in our own
mind to things that never actually occur
in reality. A useful frame has been like
if it has not occurred yet I will not
worry about it. I used to really obsess
about planning out contingencies and I
still sometimes have this tendency but
if you're like I want to play out this I
want to play this out. I want to play
this out. I'll play this out all these
different all these different scenarios
in a negative frame. I'm not saying
planning is bad, but I'm saying
ruminating on negative, you know,
potential futures can be negative. By
the time something like that happens,
number one, it will not happen in the
way that I imagined. It almost never
does. Number two, I will have different
resources available to me at that time
versus what I have today. The path will
become immediately obvious and apparent
to me when that occurs. And if we're
really honest about it, most serious
thinking doesn't require that much time.
But worrying can take all day and all
night. With all that being said,
sometimes you have to give yourself a
little bit of grace because in some
seasons of life, maintaining is winning.
Just not losing ground is the W. You're
not having a bad year. You had a few bad
days that you're thinking about for the
rest of the year. This has been
something that I've been really visiting
a lot, which is like we think about our
our, you know, our lives like this and
say, "This was bad. All of this was
bad." But the thing is is that these
types of labels only happen in the
abstract when zoomed all the way out.
And so the flip side is when we're
making our judgments, we want to zoom in
because when we look at this line, our
days were like this. I might have had a
bad moment or another bad moment. And so
I can just say I had these two bad
moments, but I had plenty of good times.
And so by percentage, I had 85% good and
I had 15% bad. So all in all, not a bad
year. And the reason I think this is so
important is I will I will start how I
ended. I'll end how I started which is
the single greatest skill that you can
develop for whatever goal that you're
trying to achieve in life is the ability
to stay in a great mood in the absence
of things to be in a great mood about.
of the salt.